README.md, before:

# function-deletion-protection

A Crossplane Composition Function that adds deletion protection to resources by creating `ClusterUsage` or `Usage` objects when resources are labeled with `protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion: "true"`.

The Usage will block deletion requests 

This function requires Crossplane version 2.0 or higher, which includes the new `protection.crossplane.io` API Group.

## Overview

This function monitors resources in a composition for the `protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion` label and creates corresponding ClusterUsage objects to prevent accidental deletion. It can protect:

- Composite resources (XRs) when labeled
- Composed resources when labeled. If a Composed resources is protected, the parent Composite will also be protected.

Resources can be labeled outside of the Composition using `kubectl label`. The function will check if either the
desired or observed state is labeled:

```yaml
apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
kind: VPC
metadata:
  labels:
    protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion: "true"
  name: my-vpc
```

The function will generate a `ClusterUsage`

```yaml
apiVersion: protection.crossplane.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterUsage
metadata:
  name: vpc-my-vpc-fn-protection
spec:
  of:
    apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
    kind: VPC
    resourceRef:
      name: my-vpc
  reason: created by function-deletion-protection via label protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion

```

If a resource is Cluster-scoped, a `ClusterUsage` will be generated. If Namespaced a `Usage` will be created in the Resource's namespace.

## Installation

The function can be installed in a Crossplane [Composition Pipeline](https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/composition/compositions/).

The only setting is `cacheTTL`, which configures the alpha Function Response Cache.

```yaml
    - step: protect-resources
      functionRef:
        name: crossplane-contrib-function-protection
      input:
        apiVersion: protection.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
        kind: Input
        cacheTTL: 10m
```

## Building

To build the Docker image for both arm64 and amd64 and save the results
in a `tar` file, run:

```shell
export VERSION=0.1.3
# Build the function's runtime image
$ docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 . --output type=oci,dest=function-deletion-protection-runtime-v${VERSION}.tar
```

Next, build the Crossplane Package:

```shell
export VERSION=0.1.3
crossplane xpkg build -f package --embed-runtime-image-tarball=function-deletion-protection-runtime-v${VERSION}.tar -o function-deletion-protection-v${VERSION}.xpkg
```

Commit message:

more testing
Signed-off-by: Steven Borrelli <steve@borrelli.org>

README.md, after:

# function-deletion-protection

A Crossplane Composition Function that adds blocks deletion of resources by creating `ClusterUsage` or `Usage` objects when resources are labeled with `protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion: "true"`.

The Usage will block deletion requests. See [Usages](https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/managed-resources/usages/) for more information.

This function requires Crossplane version 2.0 or higher, which includes the new `protection.crossplane.io` API Group.

## Overview

This function monitors resources in a composition for the `protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion` label and creates corresponding ClusterUsage objects to prevent accidental deletion. It can protect:

- Composite resources (XRs) when labeled
- Composed resources when labeled. If a Composed resources is protected, the parent Composite will also be protected.

Resources can be labeled outside of the Composition using `kubectl label`. The function will check if either the
desired or observed state is labeled:

```yaml
apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
kind: VPC
metadata:
  labels:
    protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion: "true"
  name: my-vpc
```

The function will generate a `ClusterUsage`

```yaml
apiVersion: protection.crossplane.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterUsage
metadata:
  name: my-vpc-2a782e-fn-protection
spec:
  of:
    apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
    kind: VPC
    resourceRef:
      name: my-vpc
  reason: created by function-deletion-protection via label protection.fn.crossplane.io/block-deletion
```

If a resource is Cluster-scoped, a `ClusterUsage` will be generated. If Namespaced a `Usage` will be created in the Resource's namespace.

The label can be applied to the resource in the Composition (the "Desired" state), or it can be applied to the
Resource in the cluster (the "Observed" state). If the Desired and Observed labels conflict, the function will
default to creating the Usage.

## Installation

The function can be installed in a Crossplane [Composition Pipeline](https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/composition/compositions/).

The only setting is `cacheTTL`, which configures the [Function Response Cache](https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/operations/operation/#function-response-cache).

```yaml
    - step: protect-resources
      functionRef:
        name: crossplane-contrib-function-protection
      input:
        apiVersion: protection.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
        kind: Input
        cacheTTL: 10m
```

## Building

To build the Docker image for both arm64 and amd64 and save the results
in a `tar` file, run:

```shell
export VERSION=0.2.0
# Build the function's runtime image
$ docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 . --output type=oci,dest=function-deletion-protection-runtime-v${VERSION}.tar
```

Next, build the Crossplane Package:

```shell
export VERSION=0.2.0
crossplane xpkg build -f package --embed-runtime-image-tarball=function-deletion-protection-runtime-v${VERSION}.tar -o function-deletion-protection-v${VERSION}.xpkg
```
